in this video I want to give you more
practical tips for getting gradient
descent to work the ideas in this video
will center around the learning rate
alpha concretely here's the gradient
descent update rule and what I want to
do in this video is tell you about what
I think of as debugging and some tips
for making sure that gradient descent is
working correctly and ii want to tell
you how to choose the learning rate
alpha at least how i go about choosing
it here's something that i often do to
make sure the gradient descent is
working correctly the job of gradient
descent is to find the value of theta
for you that you know hopefully
minimizes the cost function J of theta
what I often do is therefore plot the
cost function J of theta as creating the
center runs so the x-axis here is the
number of iterations of gradient descent
and is creating descent runs you
hopefully get a plot that maybe look
like this
notice that the x-axis is number of
iterations previously we were looking at
plots of J of theta where the x-axis
where the horizontal axis was the
parameter vector theta but this is not
what this is concretely what this point
is is I'm going to run gradient descent
for 100 iterations and whatever value I
get for theta after 100 iterations I'm
going to get you know some value of
theta
after 100 iterations and I'm going to
evaluate the cost function J of theta
fold the value of theta I get after
hundred iterations and this vertical
height is the value of J of theta for
the value of theta I got after 100
iterations of green descent and this
point here that corresponds to the value
of J of theta for the theta that I get
after I've run gradient descent for 200
iterations so what this plot is showing
is assuring the value of your cost
function after each iteration of
gradient descent and a gradient descent
is working properly then J of theta
should decrease after every iteration
and one useful thing that this sorta
plug can tell you also is that if you
look at the specific figure that I've
drawn you know it looks like by the time
you've gotten out two maybe three
hundred iterations between 300 and 400
iterations in this segment it looks like
J of theta hasn't gone down much more so
by the time you get to 400 iterations it
looks like this curve has flattened out
here and so way out here for one
generations it looks like gradient
descent has more or less converged
because your cost function isn't going
down much more so looking at this figure
can also help you judge whether or not
gradient descent has converged by the
way the number of iterations that
gradient descent takes to converge for a
particular application can vary a lot so
maybe for one application gradient
descent be conversion after just thirty
iterations for a different in for your
different application gradient descent
may take 3,000 iterations for another
algorithm for another learning algorithm
it may take three million iterations it
turns out to be very difficult to tell
in advance how many iterations gradient
descent needs to converge and it's
usually by plotting this sort of plot
plotting the cost function as as being
increasing number of iterations is
usually by looking at these parts like
that I try to tell if gradient descent
has converged it is also possible to
come up with automatic convergence test
namely to have an algorithm try to tell
you if gradient descent has converged
and here's that may be a pretty typical
example of an automatic convergence test
and such a test may declare convergence
if your cost function J of theta
decreases by less than some small value
some small value epsilon some small
value ten to the minus three in one
iteration but I find that usually
choosing what this threshold is is
pretty difficult and so in order to
check your gradient descent this
converge I actually tend to look at
plots like these like this figure on the
left rather than rely on and what
Mattek convergence test looking at this
older figure can also tell you or give
you an advance warning if maybe gradient
descent is not working correctly
concretely if you plot J of theta as a
function of the number of iterations
then and if you see a figure like this
where J of theta is actually increasing
then that gives you a clear sign that
gradient descent is not working and I
figured like this usually means that you
should be using a learning rate alpha if
J of theta is actually increasing the
most common cause for that is if you are
maybe trying to minimize the function
that Tom maybe looks like this but if
your learning rate is too big then if
you start off their grading descent may
overshoots the minimum and send you
there and if the learner is too big you
may overshoot again and then send you
there and so on so that you know well
what you really wanted was really start
here and for it to slowly go downhill
right but the learning rate is too big
then gradient descent can instead you
know keep on overshooting the minimum so
that you actually end up getting worse
and worse sort of getting to higher
values of the cost function J of theta
so do you end up with a plot like this
and if you see a plot like this the fix
usually is to just use a smaller value
of alpha oh and also of course make sure
that your code does not have a bug in it
but usually to watch a value of alpha
this is the most common but it could be
a common problem similarly sometimes you
may also see J of theta do something
like this and we go down for a while
then go up then go down for a while and
go up go down for a while go up and so
on and the fix for something like this
is also to use a smaller value of alpha
I'm not going to prove it here but under
mouth assumptions about the cost
function J which that's how true for
linear regression you can show what
mathematicians have shown that if your
learning rate alpha is small enough then
J of theta should decrease on every
single iteration so if this doesn't
happen probably means alpha is too big
mean you should send a smaller but of
course you also don't want your learning
rate to be too small because if you do
that if you were to do that then
gradient
can be slow to converge and if alpha
were too small you might end up starting
out hero say and you know end up taking
just minuscule minuscule baby steps
right and just taking a lot a lot of
taking a lot of iterations before you
finally get to the minimum and sort of
alpha is too small green descent can
make very slow progress and be slow to
converge to summarize if the learning
rate is too small
you can have a slow convergence problem
and then learning rate is too large J of
theta may not decrease on every
iteration and they may not even converge
in some cases the learning rate is too
large slow convergence is also possible
but the more common problem you see is
that just that J of theta may not
decrease on every iteration and in order
to debug all of these things often
plotting that J of theta as a function
of the number of innovations can help
you figure out what's going on
concretely what I actually do when I run
gradient descent is I would try a range
of values so just try running gradient
descent with a range of values for alpha
at like four point zero one 0.01 so
these are factor of ten differences and
for these different values of alpha just
plot J of theta as a function of number
of iterations and then pick the value of
alpha that you know seems to be causing
J of theta to decrease rapidly in fact
what I do actually isn't these steps of
ten so this is zero this is a scale
factor of ten of each step up what I
actually do is try this range of values
and so on where this is you know 0.001
I'll then increase the learning rate
threefold to get 0.03 and then this step
up this is another roughly three-fold
increase point from 0.03 to 0.01 and and
so these are roughly you know trying out
gradient descents with each value I try
being about 3x bigger than the previous
value so what I'll do is try range of
values until I have made sure that I
found one value that's too small and
make sure I found one value that's too
vomiting they're not sort of try to pick
the largest possible value or just
something slightly too small
then the largest reasonable value to
that found and when I do that usually
disgust me a good learning rate for my
problem and if you do this to hopefully
you'll be able to choose a good learning
rate for your implementation of gradient
descent